# Getting Started with OMC3

## Installing

The package is deployed to `PyPI` and installation is easily done via `pip`:

```bash
python -m pip install omc3
```

Additionally, some features require access to the CERN Technical Network and require CERN-specific dependencies.
Those are installable from the CERN [Acc-Py][accpy_docs]{target=_blank .cern_internal} index through the `cern` extra, and can be installed from the CERN network or by providing the `index-url`:

```bash
python -m pip install --index-url http://acc-py-repo.cern.ch:8081/repository/vr-py-releases/simple --trusted-host acc-py-repo.cern.ch "omc3[cern]"
```

After installing, codes can be run with either `python -m omc3.SCRIPT --FLAG ARGUMENT` or calling path to the `.py` file directly.

## Functionality

For detailed information on the various parts of the package, please refer to the [documentation][omc3_docs]{target=_blank}.

### Main Scripts

Main scripts to be executed lie in the `/omc3` module directly. These include:

- `hole_in_one.py` to perform frequency analysis on turn by turn BPM data and infer optics (and more) for a given accelerator.
- `kmod_importer.py` to average, import and calculate lumi-imbalace K-modulation results.
- `knob_extractor.py` to extract from `NXCALS` the value of given knobs in the machine at a given time.
- `model_creator.py` to generate optics models required for optics analysis.
- `global_correction.py` to calculate corrections from measurement files.
- `response_creator.py` to provide correction response files.
- `tbt_converter.py` to convert different turn by turn data types to `SDDS`, potentially adding noise.
- `amplitude_detuning_analysis.py` to perform amp. det. analysis on optics data with tune correction.
- `madx_wrapper.py` to start a `MAD-X` run with a file or string as input.

### Plotting Scripts

Plotting scripts for analysis outputs can be found in the `/omc3/plotting` submodule:

- `plot_spectrum.py` to generate plots from files generated by frequency analysis.
- `plot_bbq.py` to generate plots from files generated by BBQ analysis.
- `plot_amplitude_detuning.py` to generate plots from files generated by amplitude detuning analysis.
- `plot_optics_measurements.py` to generate plots from files generated by optics_measurements.
- `plot_tfs.py` to plot TFS file contents.
- `plot_kmod_results.py` to plot the beta and waist of the K-modulation results.

### Other Scripts

Other general utility scripts are in `/omc3/scripts` module:

- `update_nattune_in_linfile.py` to update the natural tune columns in the lin files by finding the highest peak in the spectrum in a given interval.
- `write_madx_macros.py` to generate `MAD-X` tracking macros with observation points from a TWISS file.
- `merge_kmod_results.py` to merge LSA results files created by kmod, and add the luminosity imbalance if the 4 needed IP/Beam files combination are present.
- `fake_measurement_from_model.py` to create a fake measurement based on a model TWISS file.
- `betabeatsrc_output_converter.py` to convert outputs from our old codes to `omc3`'s new standardized format.
- `linfile_clean.py` to automatically clean given columns in lin files.
- `kmod_average.py` to calculate the average of multiple K-modulation measurements.
- `kmod_import.py` to import a K-modulation measurement into an optics-measurement directory.
- `kmod_lumi_imbalace.py` to calculate the luminosity imbalance between two IPs from averaged K-modulation files.
- `bad_bpms_summary.py` to collect and summarize the bad BPMs from GUI runs.

A typical analysis workflow with `omc3` is described in the [next page](analysis.md).

[accpy_docs]: https://wikis.cern.ch/display/ACCPY/Accelerating+Python+Home
[omc3_docs]: https://pylhc.github.io/omc3/